# HyperSphere Markov Chain Monte Carlo 

This repository contains the slides of my Master Thesis's discussion and part of the supporting Python code. 

## Abstract 

Gradient-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms are a class of methods that leverage the gradient information of the target distribution to generate samples from a distribution of interest more efficiently. Despite their general effectiveness, Gradient-based MCMC methods tend to be less robust to heterogeneity of scales across dimensions of the target distribution and in cases of exploding or vanishing gradients. To address these problems, this thesis develops a novel Gradient-based MCMC algorithm that decouples the magnitude of the step-size, which remains fixed, while still leveraging the gradient to inform the move. The HyperSphere algorithm achieves this result by sampling on the surface of a d-dimensional hypersphere, with fixed radius, centered at the current value of the chain and in the direction of the gradient. The thesis includes the theoretical derivation of the algorithm, outlines its pseudocode and studies its computational feasibility in Python. Furthermore, via numerical simulations, we assess the efficiency scaling of the algorithm on high dimensional targets compared to state-of-the-art alternatives such as MALA. The results confirm that the HyperSphere algorithm is able to achieve the same level of efficiency. Finally, the thesis includes a preliminary investigation of two potential applications of the HyperSphere algorithm with targets characterized by light tails and heterogeneity of scales across dimensions.  
